## Abstract:
While social media platforms facilitate information access, fake news videos pose serious societal risks. Most detection methods treat fake news as a binary classification problem, ignoring the unique deceptive patterns of each fake item. To address this, we introduce the Fake News Video Explanation (FNVE) task, which generates natural language explanations for fake news videos. To support this, we develop FakeVE, a new dataset comprising 2672 fake news video posts, which provides explicit explanations for four real-world deceptive aspects of fake news videos. Furthermore, we propose a Multimodal Relation Graph Transformer (MRGT) model that explicitly models intra- and inter-modal inconsistencies via graph reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MRGT achieves state-of-the-art performance on FakeVE, outperforming strong baselines including recent Multimodal Large Language Models by up to +1.36 in BLEU-4 and +8.80 in ROUGE-L. Our work provides the first systematic benchmark for generating explanations for false news video, and highlights the importance of specialized architectures for this task. 

## Aspect Inclusion:

- **Contextual Dishonesty (CD)**: News titles are semantic or out of context to video or audio content.
- **Splice Tampering (ST)**: Pering a news video is deliberately selected or randomly spliced, resulting in a lack of logical coherence or data unrelated to the title or audio theme.
- **Synthetic Voiceover (SV)**: News audio is synthetic speech generated by clips whose content is inconsistent with the subject matter of the video picture or the title.
- **Contrived Absurdity (CA)**: News video, audio, and titles are consistent in their multimodal content, but the overall message defies basic common sense or logic.

## Data Format:
  ```
    {
        "video_id":"_qwLHlVjRyw",
        "class":"fv",
        "contextual_class":"",
        "label":"false",
        "subject":"space X",
        "title":"Starship | SN8 | High-Altitude Flight Recap",
        "audio_transcript":"Rappers take to the skies.",
        "annotation":"The video contains misleading commentary, such as 'Rappers take to the skies,' which distracts from the actual focus on the SpaceX rocket launch. This suggests a lack of seriousness about the technological advancements being showcased. The emphasis on entertainment rather than factual reporting raises concerns about the video's credibility."
    }
  ```

## Data Acquisition
If you would like to access the FakeVE dataset, please fill out this [Application Form](https://forms.office.com/Pages/ResponsePage.aspx?id=DQSIkWdsW0yxEjajBLZtrQAAAAAAAAAAAAN__ibfO5VUM09RNFA5VjJaUlRPOVY3U0NKMFBKUE9MMi4u). The download link will be sent to you once the form is accepted.


## Citation
If you find our research helpful, please cite the following:
 ```
@article{chen2026multimodal,
  title={Multimodal fake news video explanation: Dataset, model and evaluation},
  author={Chen, Lizhi and Qian, Zhong and Li, Peifeng and Zhu, Qiaoming},
  journal={Information Processing \& Management},
  volume={63},
  number={6},
  pages={104769},
  year={2026},
  publisher={Elsevier}
}
  ```
